new blog post about Rocket Validator (#2636)
elixirschool/elixirschool: _posts/2021-08-23-rocket-validator.md

---
author: Jaime Iniesta

> author_link: https://jaimeiniesta.com

Reviewer: ```suggestion
author_link: https://github.com/jaimeiniesta
```

I believe the author link is used to power the author thumbnail image which pulls from your Github profile. For example, if you look at the post previews [here](https://beta.elixirschool.com/blog), the one missing an image is [another blog post](https://github.com/elixirschool/elixirschool/blob/master/_posts/2021-07-14-elixir-book-club.md) that uses a personal website link

categories: general
date: 2021-08-16
layout: post
title: "Validating accessibility and HTML with Rocket Validator"
excerpt: >
Learn how we're checking and monitoring the new Elixir School site to detect and fix accessibility and HTML issues using Rocket Validator.
---

## Intro

> One of the core principles of Elixir School is to be an inclusive community. We want to help people from all over the world learn to code using Elixir. To facilitate that we provide translations of the lessons to many languages, maintained by volunteers worldwide. By removing the language barrier, we're helping more people get into the Elixir community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the core principles of Elixir School is to be an inclusive community. We want to help people from all over the world learn to code using Elixir. To facilitate that, we provide translations of the lessons to many languages, maintained by volunteers worldwide. By removing the language barrier, we're helping more people get into the Elixir community.
```

Apart from the language barrier, there are other barriers that we're aware of - [web accessibility barriers](https://www.w3.org/WAI/people-use-web/abilities-barriers/) are everywhere on the World Wide Web, making it harder for people to access content that is often taken for granted.

> Low vision may make a web unreadable if the text has low contrast or the font size cannot be adapted easily. Unsighted people can use screen readers to hear the page content, but it won't work well if the content is poorly structured and can't be properly interpreted by the screen reader software. People with reduced mobility may prefer to navigate through the lessons using the keyboard instead of the mouse, but again this won't work fine if the document is not laid out correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Low vision may make a web page unreadable if the text has low contrast or the font size cannot be adapted easily. Unsighted people can use screen readers to hear the page content, but it won't work well if the content is poorly structured and can't be properly interpreted by the screen reader software. People with reduced mobility may prefer to navigate through the lessons using the keyboard instead of the mouse, but again this won't work if the document is not laid out correctly.
```

The good news is that we can make Elixir School accessible for everyone. And it's not a hard task, it just requires that we're aware of those barriers and that we follow the web standards to provide well-structured web pages.

## How to find accessibility and HTML issues

The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is an international community that defines and develops [Web standards](https://www.w3.org/standards/), HTML being probably the most used -and abused- of those standards. At the end of 1997, the [W3C launched](https://www.webdesignmuseum.org/web-design-history/w3c-html-validator-1997) the [W3C HTML Validator](https://validator.w3.org/), a service to check any web page and find issues in its HTML structure. More than two decades later this service is still around and in good health and many tools have been built around its [open source validator](https://github.com/validator/validator).

> HTML is the basis of web pages, but still a perfectly valid HTML page can have accessibility issues. For example, a web page may have a bad combination of colors that results in low contrast: a light color text over a light background may lead to unreadable text by people with low vision. If a video has no captions, deaf users won't understand what it's talking about. Sections of the document may be not accessible for users that don't employ a mouse to move through the document. Zooming and scaling may have been disabled, making it impossible for the users to enlarge the web page to see it better. Many known issues are easily detected using automated accessibility checkers like [axe-core](https://github.com/dequelabs/axe-core).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
HTML is the basis of web pages, but still a perfectly valid HTML page can have accessibility issues. For example, a web page may have a bad combination of colors that results in low contrast: a light color text over a light background may lead to unreadable text by people with low vision. If a video has no captions, deaf users won't understand what it's talking about. Sections of the document may be not accessible for users that don't employ a mouse to move through the document. Zooming and scaling may be disabled, making it impossible for the users to enlarge the web page to see it better. Many known issues are easily detected using automated accessibility checkers like [axe-core](https://github.com/dequelabs/axe-core).
```

This tweak just aligns with the verb tenses used in previous examples!

## The power of automated site validation

> So, it's great that we have tools that help in detecting issues on web pages. Both the W3C HTML validator and axe-core are open source and can be incorporated into our web development flow. But, there's an important limitation: they can only check one URL at a time. When you have a small website with just a few web pages, it might be an option to do manual checks using these tools. But, what can we do with a large site like Elixir School? According to the latest reports, Elixir School has more than 1,000 web pages. If we want to check them all with the W3C Validator and axe-core, we're going to run 2,000 manual checks!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, it's great that we have tools that help in detecting issues on web pages. Both the W3C HTML validator and axe-core are open source and can be incorporated into our web development flow. But, there's an important limitation: they can only check one URL at a time. When you have a small website with just a few web pages, it might be an option to do manual checks using these tools. But, what can we do with a large site like Elixir School? According to the latest reports, Elixir School has more than 1,000 web pages. If we want to check them all with the W3C Validator and axe-core, we would need to run 2,000 manual checks!
```

## 🚀 Rocket Validator to the rescue!

[Rocket Validator](https://rocketvalidator.com) is an online service that performs site-wide validation of large websites. It's basically an automated web crawler, that will find the internal web pages of a site and validate each web page found using the W3C Validator and axe-core, producing detailed reports on the issues found, within seconds.

> This service, also powered by Elixir, Phoenix, LiveView and Oban, is a subscription-based service for web agencies and freelance developers, but it's free for open source projects like [Elixir School](https://github.com/elixirschool/school_house/pulls?q=is%3Apr+label%3A%22rocket+validator%22+is%3Aclosed) and [Docusaurus](https://github.com/facebook/docusaurus/pulls?q=is%3Apr+rocket+validator). We're using Rocket Validator to run reports on the new Elixir School and to monitor the site via weekly schedules and deploy-triggered validations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This service, also powered by Elixir, Phoenix, LiveView and Oban, is a subscription-based service for web agencies and freelance developers. But, it's free for open source projects like [Elixir School](https://github.com/elixirschool/school_house/pulls?q=is%3Apr+label%3A%22rocket+validator%22+is%3Aclosed) and [Docusaurus](https://github.com/facebook/docusaurus/pulls?q=is%3Apr+rocket+validator)! We're using Rocket Validator to run reports on the new Elixir School and to monitor the site via weekly scheduled and deploy-triggered validations.
```

The first sentence felt a bit lengthy so I broke it up, up to you if you want to accept this change as it is more stylistic.

Author: OK about breaking the long sentence, but is "via weekly scheduled" correct?

Reviewer: Good question, I guess "weekly" is modifying the scheduled adjective, so it should also be hyphenated. We could probably trim this sentence to just: "We are using Rocket Validator to run reports on the new Elixir School via weekly-scheduled and deploy-triggered validations."

This should convey that we are using two types of validations: ones scheduled (weekly) and ones triggered by a deploy.

Author: Sounds good to me! I'll commit your suggestion and edit the file.

![Rocket Validator summary report](https://www.dropbox.com/s/z611nr8ofpikawx/rocket-validator-summary-report.png?raw=1)

## Sharing reports

Any site validation report generated by Rocket Validator can easily be shared, just by pasting its URL. This lets us reference any section of the report in Github issues, so we can work together on fixing them.

The new Domain Stats feature in Rocket Validator provides analytics on the reports for a domain and is also easily shared. Check out the updated [Elixir School Stats](https://rocketvalidator.com/domains/beta.elixirschool.com?auth=e536facf-2cba-4288-ba45-3e7b95addcf8) to get the latest reports run on the site and stats for the web page coverage and HTML / Accessibility status evolution over time.

![HTML issue density evolution for Elixir School](https://www.dropbox.com/s/m36htu85nvxmpse/rocket-validator-html-charts.png?raw=1)

The graph above shows how we're improving Elixir School by reducing the average HTML issue density (issues per page) over time.

## Validating light / dark modes for contrast issues

> Elixir School has a light / dark mode switch which is great to choose the UI you prefer, but this also means all our URLs are duplicated regarding contrast issues. If we want to ensure there are no contrast issues, we need to check both in light and dark modes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Elixir School has a light / dark mode switch which is great to choose the UI you prefer, but this also means all of our URLs need to be validated in light mode and dark mode to ensure there are no low contrast issues for each theme.
```

![Light and Dark modes on Elixir School](https://www.dropbox.com/s/yzzj595vteqdi69/rocket-validator-contrast.png?raw=1)

> To validate accessibility on both the light and dark modes, we came up with the idea of adding an optional parameter `?ui=dark` on the URLs that, when present, enables the dark mode. So, we can run reports for the light mode using the default [light mode XML sitemap](https://beta.elixirschool.com/sitemap.xml) and reports for the dark mode using the [dark mode XML sitemap](https://beta.elixirschool.com/sitemap_dark_mode.xml) that adds this parameter to the URLs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To validate accessibility on both the light and dark modes, we came up with the idea of adding an optional parameter `?ui=dark` on the URLs that, when present, enables dark mode. So, we can run reports for the light mode using the default [light mode XML sitemap](https://beta.elixirschool.com/sitemap.xml) and reports for the dark mode using the [dark mode XML sitemap](https://beta.elixirschool.com/sitemap_dark_mode.xml) that adds this parameter to the URLs.
```

However, manual checking and common sense will always be required in web development. A site may follow the strictest web standards but still not be accessible. Think, for example, of `alt` descriptions in images - they're not useful at all unless they really provide a [meaningful description](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=meaningful+alt+image+description&t=opera&ia=web).

Apart from automated tests, you also need to do manual checks on your site using a screen reader, turning the screen off, navigating using the keyboard instead of the mouse, etc. We're aware of that and have already a list of [issues discovered via manual testing](https://github.com/elixirschool/school_house/issues/114) that will soon be addressed.

## Conclusion

Web page validation is an important step in web development that is often skipped because manually checking each web page is a cumbersome task.

Fortunately, there are ways to automate large site validation, so we can quickly detect and fix HTML and accessibility issues, smashing many accessibility barriers on our sites and making them reachable by a larger number of people.

## Thanks!

> This article was written by [Jaime Iniesta](https://jaimeiniesta.com), a freelance web developer that has created [Rocket Validator](https://rocketvalidator.com) using Elixir.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This article was written by [Jaime Iniesta](https://jaimeiniesta.com), a freelance web developer who has created [Rocket Validator](https://rocketvalidator.com) using Elixir.
```

HTML is the basis of web pages, but still a perfectly valid HTML page can have accessibility issues. For example, a web page may have a bad combination of colors that results in low contrast: a light color text over a light background may lead to unreadable text by people with low vision. If a video has no captions, deaf users won't understand what it's talking about. Sections of the document may be not accessible for users that don't employ a mouse to move through the document. Zooming and scaling may have been disabled, making it impossible for the users to enlarge the web page to see it better. Many known issues are easily detected using automated accessibility checkers like [axe-core](https://github.com/dequelabs/axe-core).

## The power of automated site validation

> So, it's great that we have tools that help in detecting issues on web pages. Both the W3C HTML validator and axe-core are open source and can be incorporated into our web development flow. But, there's an important limitation: they can only check one URL at a time. When you have a small website with just a few web pages, it might be an option to do manual checks using these tools. But, what can we do with a large site like Elixir School? On the latest reports, Elixir School has more than 1,000 web pages. If we want to check them all with the W3C Validator and axe-core, we're going to run 2,000 manual checks!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So, it's great that we have tools that help in detecting issues on web pages. Both the W3C HTML validator and axe-core are open source and can be incorporated into our web development flow. But, there's an important limitation: they can only check one URL at a time. When you have a small website with just a few web pages, it might be an option to do manual checks using these tools. But, what can we do with a large site like Elixir School? According to the latest reports, Elixir School has more than 1,000 web pages. If we want to check them all with the W3C Validator and axe-core, we're going to run 2,000 manual checks!
```

However, manual checking and common sense will always be required in web development. A site may follow the strictest web standards but still not be accessible. Think, for example, of `alt` descriptions in images - they're not useful at all unless they really provide a [meaningful description](https://duckduckgo.com/?q=meaningful+alt+image+description&t=opera&ia=web).

Apart from automated tests, you also need to do manual checks on your site using a screen reader, turning the screen off, navigating using the keyboard instead of the mouse, etc. We're aware of that and have already a list of [issues discovered via manual testing](https://github.com/elixirschool/school_house/issues/114) that will soon be addressed.

## Conclusion

> Web page validation is an important step in web development, that is often skipped because manually checking each web page is a cumbersome task.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Web page validation is an important step in web development that is often skipped because manually checking each web page is a cumbersome task.
```

Fortunately, there are ways to automate large site validation, so we can quickly detect and fix HTML and accessibility issues, smashing many accessibility barriers on our sites and making them reachable by a larger number of people.

## Thanks!

This article was written by [Jaime Iniesta](https://jaimeiniesta.com), a freelance web developer that has created [Rocket Validator](https://rocketvalidator.com) using Elixir.

Try Rocket Validator on your sites by creating a [Free Rocket Validator Account](https://rocketvalidator.com/registration/new).

If you want to upgrade after that, use the **[ELIXIRSCHOOL](https://rocketvalidator.com/pricing?coupon=ELIXIRSCHOOL) coupon code to get a 50% discount** on any subscription plan.

> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

```
